# Getting Started

This section is for end users interested in using Clowder as a data repository, data sharing
platform, or to develop data pipelines.

There are two main ways to interact with Clowder

- web interface
- web API

Most users will use the web interface to upload, download, and manage data, metadata, analytics and data visualizations.
Advanced users can use the web API to interact with Clowder programmatically through scripts, Jupyter notebooks, or
other services.

## Data Model

The main resources in Clowder is the **dataset**.
A Clowder dataset is a collection of files, folders, metadata and visualizations.
Datasets can be shared and downloaded.
When uploading new data, users can create a new dataset or add files to existing datasets.

One unique aspect of Clowder is the ability to attach **metadata** to files and datasets.
Metadata can be used to store any kind of information about the underlying data, such as provenance, data quality, or
data processing steps.
A dataset or a file can have multiple metadata documents attached to it.
These metadata documents can be manually added by the owner of the file or dataset, or automatically generated by
information extractors.
If the dataset is shared with other users, they can also add metadata to the dataset.

Unlike most other systems which store metadata as key value pairs, Clowder represents metadata as JSON for Linking
Data, [JSON-LD](https://json-ld.org/).
The advantage of using JSON-LD is that it affords the simplicity of JSON, but enforces semantic information about each
field in the JSON document.
JSON-LD can also be serialized to [RDF](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Resource_Description_Framework), make metadata
interoperable with other systems, including [knowledge graphs](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Knowledge_graph).

When a user manually adds metadata to a file or dataset, they will pick from a list of metadata fields defined by the
system.
The administrators of the Clowder instance can define the metadata fields that are available to users.
These metadata fields can be simple text fields, dropdowns, or more complex fields like date pickers.
Clowder, via information extractors, can also add metadata automatically to files and datasets.
These metadata documents can be the results a ofa manual submission to an information extractor or the result of an
automatic extraction triggered by the system.

## Signing Up

Each user must sign up for an account to use Clowder. By default, users can sign up for a local account on the specific
Clowder instance. Some instances may also allow users to sign in using single sign-on, through OAuth provider like
Google, GitHub, [CILogon](https://cilogon.org/), [Globus](https://www.globus.org/).

Depending on the configuration of the instance, users might not be automatically enabled once they have created an
account.
In this case, the administrator of the instance will need to enable the account.

## Browsing and Searching

## Uploading Data

## Sharing Data
